Paper notes

The progenetix oncogenomic resource in 2021


Progenetix is a publicly accessible cancer genome data resource (progenetix.org) that aims to provide a comprehensive representation of genomic variation profiles in cancer, through providing sample-specific CNA profiles and associated metadata as well as services related to data annotation, meta-analysis and visualization. It has incorporated data of hundreds of publications on genome profiling experiments based on molecular ctogenetics and sequencing. It is a collection of different collections such as arrayMap aund TCGA, cBioPortal, NCBI, GEO, EMBL-EBI
Data expansion and new features
In the new update, they included data from GEO, ArrayExpress,cBioPortal and TCGA, directly derived from publication supplements and collaborative projects. They also included cancer related genomic profiles with no corresponding GEO entries by using their analysis pipeline.
For annotating the meta data and the biomedical parameters, they also used a combination of text mining methods and expert curation.
TCGA project provides a set of multiomics data with metadata annotation for a large collection of cancer types, currently In this update, they incorporated its copy number variation (CNV) profiling data as well as transformed the relevant clinical information into the system.

Data processing
They prefer to have the least amount of preprocessing and do their own data processing.
their model treats the most prevalent copy number as the baseline and derives the relative copy number gain and loss per sample based on the assumption that the relative gene dosage imbalance exerts pathophysiological effects in cancer biology. 

SNP array based experiments- where the status of both alleles can be evaluated separately— they have analyzed allele-specific copy number data (ASCN) and incor- porated 35897 loss of heterozygosity (LOH) profiles into the database 

ASCN gives probe-wise an overview of germline variant landscape (like in determining the ancestry back- ground) and  it allows detection of LOH events, including copy-number-neutral event (CN-LOH) ->commonly observed in hematological malignancies 

SNP arrays have their B-allele frequency determined probewise and performed subsequent segmentation, ASCN is then used to assess ancestry provenance of the samples and then the LOH regions are stored in the database.

Metadata
ICD-O: Morphology and Topography coding systems with high specifity but no hierarchical concepts so it does not transform to modern ontologies. provides organ- and substructure-specific mapping rooted in traditional clinical and diagnostic aspects of a ‘tumor entity’ 
NCIt: is a dynamically developed hierarchical ontology, which enables layered data and transfer between classification systems and ressources. But this ongoing expansion is not very suited for primary sample annotations.
In the update, they performed a data-driven generation of ICD-O—NCIt mappings and added the derived NCIt codes to all samples.

For the too specific NCIt terms, which are not represented in the hierarchical tree, they defined 51 prominent nodes under which they summarize and visualize the collection.
for terms with multiple occurences. They defined a preferred path by prioritizing morphology based separation.

CNV data content by cancer type
The fraction of genome with a copy number alteration (CNV fraction) varies widely among the cancer types.
->breast carcinoma shows a consistent CNV profile; the CNV patterns in cervical and col- orectal (carcinoma also correspond with previous observation. similar to T-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma, myelodysplastic syndrome, and a number of malignant epithelial tumors. LOH profiles were also made -> LOH profile of a cancer genome complements its CNV profile with the information of allelic loss. 


[screenshot 16.10.52 in repository]
https://github.com/YaelHeid/Yael-Heid/blob/main/Screen%20Shot%202022-09-21%20at%2016.10.52.png

UBERON anatomy ontology: a cross-species anatomical structural ontology system closely aligned with developmental processes. Its relationship structure allows integrative queries linking multiple databases (e.g. Gene Ontology and Protein Ontology) and description logic query within the same organism (linking related organs) and between model animals and humans. 
 
 
[screenshot 16.05.45 in repository]
 https://github.com/YaelHeid/Yael-Heid/blob/main/Screen%20Shot%202022-09-21%20at%2016.05.45.png

 
Provenances are made by:
-	Geography: in the meta data, every sample has included geographic point coordinates (approximated or that corresponding to the author of the publication) from the GeoNames database. -> useful for epistemic validation and decision processes 
-	Ancestry group: important for assessing correlations between genomic variants and ancestral population background and influence of genetic background on tumor development 

Data access modalities
since the update:GA4GH data schema standards are adopted and migrated to Phenopackets and they have also changed the user Interface (provides flexibility and versatility in query parameters and types and optimized the response delivery).

Data standards
The data storage and representation models for the Progenetix resource have been designed to comply with concepts developed by the previous GA4GH Data Working Group and subsequent GA4GH work streams, documented e.g. by the ‘SchemaBlocks’ initiative 
-> ‘individual—biosample(s) - variants’ meta-model: is applicable to cancer-related analyses with potentially multiple samples representing different stages in the course of disease and the underlying genomic background. This hierarchical model provides a solid representation and connection between the physical source of the data and the logical genotyping information and adapts to various scenarios for data aggregation and analysis 

Cell line collection
Progenetix data collection also includes genomic profiling experiments using in vitro models 
